\input texinfo   @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename mysql-el.info
@settitle mysql-el --- Emacs MySQL Dynamic Module
@documentencoding UTF-8
@c %**end of header

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top mysql-el

This manual describes the @code{mysql-el} Emacs dynamic module, which
provides native MySQL client access from Emacs Lisp.
@end ifnottex

@menu
* MySQL Database::  MySQL Database Access.
@end menu

@node MySQL Database
@chapter MySQL Database Access
@cindex database access, MySQL
@cindex MySQL module

  Emacs can access MySQL databases through the @code{mysql-el} dynamic
module.  This module provides a set of Lisp functions whose interface is
modeled after the built-in SQLite support (@ref{Database,,, elisp}).  This
chapter describes the facilities available for accessing MySQL databases
from Lisp programs.

  To use this module, you must first compile it and load the resulting
shared library into Emacs.  @xref{Loading the Module}.

@menu
* Loading the Module::       How to build and load the MySQL module.
* MySQL Connection::         Opening and closing database connections.
* MySQL Execution::          Executing SQL statements.
* MySQL Queries::            Selecting data from the database.
* MySQL Set Objects::        Lazy cursor iteration over result sets.
* MySQL Batch Execution::    Running multiple statements at once.
* MySQL Transactions::       Transaction support.
* MySQL Utility Functions::  Escaping strings and version information.
* MySQL Async API::          Non-blocking query execution.
* MySQL Type Mapping::       How types are mapped between Emacs Lisp and MySQL.
* MySQL Complete Example::   A complete example from start to finish.
@end menu

@node Loading the Module
@section Loading the Module
@cindex loading MySQL module

  The @code{mysql-el} module must be compiled from C source before use.
It requires the MySQL client library (@code{libmysqlclient}) and an
Emacs binary built with dynamic module support (@option{--with-modules}).

To compile:

@example
cd modules/mysql-el
make
@end example

If the MySQL client library is installed in a non-standard location, you
may need to set @env{LD_LIBRARY_PATH} before running Emacs:

@example
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$HOME/mysqlinst/lib
@end example

To load the module in Emacs:

@lisp
(module-load "/path/to/mysql-el.so")
@end lisp

@noindent
After loading, the module provides the @code{mysql-el} feature:

@lisp
(require 'mysql-el)
@end lisp

@defun mysql-available-p
This function returns non-@code{nil} if the MySQL module has been
loaded and is available in the current Emacs session.
@end defun

@node MySQL Connection
@section Opening and Closing Connections
@cindex MySQL connection

@cindex database object, MySQL
@defun mysql-open host user password &optional database port timeout
Open a connection to a MySQL server and return a @dfn{database object}.
@var{host} is the hostname or IP address of the MySQL server (e.g.,
@code{"127.0.0.1"}).  @var{user} and @var{password} are the
authentication credentials; pass an empty string @code{""} for
@var{password} if no password is required.

The optional @var{database} argument, if non-@code{nil}, specifies the
default database to use.  The optional @var{port} argument, if
non-@code{nil}, specifies the TCP port number (default is 3306).

The optional @var{timeout} argument, if a positive integer, sets the
read, write, and connect timeout in seconds.  When the server is
unresponsive (e.g., stopped in a debugger, network partition), the
connection will time out instead of blocking Emacs indefinitely.
A value of 0 or @code{nil} means no timeout.

The connection is automatically configured to use the @code{utf8mb4}
character set, so that Unicode strings (including emoji and CJK
characters) round-trip correctly.  The connection also enables
multi-statement mode, which is required for @code{mysql-execute-batch}.

The returned database object can be used as the first argument to all
the subsequent functions described in this chapter.  If the object is
garbage-collected, the underlying MySQL connection is automatically
closed.

@lisp
;; Minimal: connect with 3 required arguments.
(setq db (mysql-open "127.0.0.1" "root" ""))

;; Full: specify database and port.
(setq db (mysql-open "127.0.0.1" "root" "secret" "mydb" 3306))

;; With 30-second timeout:
(setq db (mysql-open "127.0.0.1" "root" "secret" "mydb" 3306 30))
@end lisp
@end defun

@defun mysqlp object
This predicate returns non-@code{nil} if @var{object} is a live MySQL
database object.  The database object returned by @code{mysql-open}
satisfies this predicate.  After @code{mysql-close} has been called on
the object, or if @var{object} is not a database handle at all, this
function returns @code{nil}.

@lisp
(mysqlp db)       @result{} t
(mysqlp "hello")  @result{} nil
(mysqlp 42)       @result{} nil
@end lisp
@end defun

@defun mysql-close db
Close the database connection @var{db}.  After closing, any attempt to
use @var{db} with other MySQL functions will signal an error.  It is
usually not necessary to call this function explicitly---the connection
will automatically be closed if Emacs shuts down or the database object
is garbage-collected.

@lisp
(mysql-close db)  @result{} t
@end lisp
@end defun

@node MySQL Execution
@section Executing SQL Statements
@cindex executing SQL, MySQL

@defun mysql-execute db query &optional values
Execute the @acronym{SQL} @var{query} on @var{db}.  For instance:

@lisp
(mysql-execute db "insert into foo values ('bar', 2)")
@end lisp

If the optional @var{values} parameter is present, it should be a list
of values to bind to the @samp{?} placeholders in @var{query} using a
prepared statement.  For instance:

@lisp
(mysql-execute db "insert into foo values (?, ?)" '("bar" 2))
@end lisp

This has exactly the same effect as the previous example, but is more
efficient and safer (because it doesn't involve any string parsing or
interpolation).

The supported types for bind parameters are: strings, integers,
floating-point numbers, and @code{nil} (which binds as @acronym{SQL}
@code{NULL}).

@code{mysql-execute} returns different values depending on the type of
statement:

@itemize @bullet
@item
For @acronym{DDL} statements (@samp{CREATE TABLE}, @samp{DROP TABLE},
etc.) and @acronym{DML} statements (@samp{INSERT}, @samp{UPDATE},
@samp{DELETE}), it returns the number of affected rows as an integer.
For instance, an @samp{INSERT} statement will typically return @samp{1},
whereas an @samp{UPDATE} statement may return zero or a higher number.

@item
For @samp{SELECT} statements (in the non-prepared path), the matching
rows are returned as a list of lists, similar to @code{mysql-select}.
However, for read queries you should prefer @code{mysql-select}, which
provides the additional @code{full} return mode.
@end itemize

@lisp
;; DDL returns 0
(mysql-execute db "create table t (id int, name text)")
    @result{} 0

;; INSERT returns 1
(mysql-execute db "insert into t values (1, 'foo')")
    @result{} 1

;; INSERT with bind parameters
(mysql-execute db "insert into t values (?, ?)" '(2 "bar"))
    @result{} 1

;; UPDATE returns count of changed rows
(mysql-execute db "update t set name = 'baz' where id <= 2")
    @result{} 2

;; DELETE returns count of deleted rows
(mysql-execute db "delete from t where id = 1")
    @result{} 1
@end lisp

Strings in this module are handled as @code{utf8mb4}, which means all
text columns are encoded and decoded using UTF-8.  This correctly
handles multi-byte characters including emoji.
@end defun

@node MySQL Queries
@section Selecting Data
@cindex selecting data, MySQL

@defun mysql-select db query &optional values return-type
Select data from @var{db} and return the result.  For instance:

@lisp
(mysql-select db "select * from foo where key = 2")
    @result{} (("bar" 2))
@end lisp

As with @code{mysql-execute}, you can optionally pass in a list of
values that will be bound to @samp{?} placeholders before executing the
query:

@lisp
(mysql-select db "select * from foo where key = ?" '(2))
    @result{} (("bar" 2))
@end lisp

This is usually more efficient and safer than the method used by the
previous example.

By default, this function returns a list of matching rows, where each
row is a list of column values.  If @var{return-type} is @code{full},
the names of the columns (as a list of strings) will be returned as the
first element in the return value:

@lisp
(mysql-select db "select * from foo" nil 'full)
    @result{} (("name" "key") ("bar" 2) ("baz" 3))
@end lisp

@noindent
The first element @code{("name" "key")} is the list of column names,
and the remaining elements are the data rows.

If @var{return-type} is @code{set}, this function returns a
@dfn{set object} (a cursor) that can be used to iterate over the result
set one row at a time, without loading all rows into memory at once.
This is especially useful for large result sets.  @xref{MySQL Set Objects}.

@lisp
(let ((set (mysql-select db "select * from foo" nil 'set)))
  (unwind-protect
      (while (mysql-more-p set)
        (let ((row (mysql-next set)))
          (when row (process-row row))))
    (mysql-finalize set)))
@end lisp

If the result set is empty, the default mode returns @code{nil}, while
the @code{full} mode returns a list containing only the column names:

@lisp
;; Default mode, empty table:
(mysql-select db "select * from empty_table")
    @result{} nil

;; Full mode, empty table:
(mysql-select db "select * from empty_table" nil 'full)
    @result{} (("col1" "col2"))
@end lisp
@end defun

@node MySQL Set Objects
@section Set Objects (Lazy Cursor Iteration)
@cindex set object, MySQL
@cindex cursor, MySQL
@cindex lazy iteration, MySQL

  When @code{mysql-select} is called with @var{return-type} set to
@code{set}, it returns a @dfn{set object} instead of a list of rows.
A set object is a cursor that allows you to fetch rows one at a time
using @code{mysql-next}, check whether more rows are available using
@code{mysql-more-p}, and retrieve column names using
@code{mysql-columns}.  This avoids loading the entire result set into
memory, which is essential for large queries.

  This interface is modeled after the built-in SQLite @code{set}
support (@code{sqlite-next}, @code{sqlite-more-p},
@code{sqlite-columns}, @code{sqlite-finalize}).

@defun mysql-next set
Return the next row from @var{set} as a list of column values.  Return
@code{nil} when all rows have been fetched.

@lisp
(setq set (mysql-select db "select * from employees" nil 'set))
(mysql-next set)
    @result{} (1 "Alice" "Engineering" 95000.0)
(mysql-next set)
    @result{} (2 "Bob" "Product" 88000.0)
(mysql-next set)
    @result{} nil
@end lisp
@end defun

@defun mysql-more-p set
Return non-@code{nil} if there are more rows available in @var{set}.
After @code{mysql-next} has returned @code{nil} (indicating that all
rows have been consumed), this function also returns @code{nil}.

@lisp
(while (mysql-more-p set)
  (let ((row (mysql-next set)))
    (when row
      (process-row row))))
@end lisp
@end defun

@defun mysql-columns set
Return the column names of @var{set} as a list of strings.  This can
be called at any time while the set is open.

@lisp
(mysql-columns set)
    @result{} ("id" "name" "dept" "salary")
@end lisp
@end defun

@defun mysql-finalize set
Free the resources held by @var{set}.  After this call, @var{set} can
no longer be used with @code{mysql-next} or other set functions.

It is not strictly necessary to call this function, because the
resources will also be freed when @var{set} is garbage-collected.
However, it is recommended to call it explicitly (typically in an
@code{unwind-protect} form) to release the MySQL connection resources
promptly.

@lisp
(let ((set (mysql-select db "select * from big_table" nil 'set)))
  (unwind-protect
      (while (mysql-more-p set)
        (let ((row (mysql-next set)))
          (when row (handle-row row))))
    (mysql-finalize set)))
@end lisp
@end defun

@node MySQL Batch Execution
@section Executing Multiple Statements
@cindex batch execution, MySQL

@defun mysql-execute-batch db statements
Execute the @acronym{SQL} @var{statements} on @var{db}.
@var{statements} is a string containing one or more @acronym{SQL}
statements separated by semicolons.  This function is useful when a
Lisp program needs to execute multiple Data Definition Language
(@acronym{DDL}) or Data Manipulation Language (@acronym{DML}) statements
in one go.

@lisp
(mysql-execute-batch db
  "create table t1 (id int);
   create table t2 (id int);
   insert into t1 values (1);")
    @result{} t
@end lisp

All statements are sent to the server as a single multi-statement query.
The function drains all result sets produced by the batch.  If any
statement in the batch produces an error, an Emacs Lisp error is
signaled.

This function does not support bind parameters.  If you need
parameterized execution, use @code{mysql-execute} for each statement
individually.
@end defun

@node MySQL Transactions
@section Transactions
@cindex transactions, MySQL

  The following functions provide explicit transaction control.
Transactions are only effective on transactional storage engines such as
InnoDB.

@defun mysql-transaction db
Start a transaction in @var{db} by executing @samp{START TRANSACTION}.
While in a transaction, changes are not visible to other connections
until the transaction is committed.
@end defun

@defun mysql-commit db
Commit the current transaction in @var{db}.  All changes made since
@code{mysql-transaction} was called become permanent.  Calling this
function when there is no active transaction is harmless (it will not
signal an error).
@end defun

@defun mysql-rollback db
Roll back the current transaction in @var{db} and discard all changes
made since @code{mysql-transaction} was called.
@end defun

A typical transaction pattern looks like this:

@lisp
(mysql-transaction db)
(condition-case err
    (progn
      (mysql-execute db "insert into accounts values (?, ?)"
                     '("Alice" 1000))
      (mysql-execute db "insert into accounts values (?, ?)"
                     '("Bob" 2000))
      (mysql-commit db))
  (error
   (mysql-rollback db)
   (signal (car err) (cdr err))))
@end lisp

@node MySQL Utility Functions
@section Utility Functions
@cindex utility functions, MySQL

@defun mysql-escape-string db string
Escape @var{string} for safe inclusion in an @acronym{SQL} statement on
@var{db}.  The escaping takes the current connection character set into
account.

@lisp
(mysql-escape-string db "it's a \"test\"")
    @result{} "it\\'s a \\\"test\\\""
@end lisp

@strong{Note:} You should prefer using bind parameters (@samp{?}
placeholders) with @code{mysql-execute} or @code{mysql-select} whenever
possible.  Use @code{mysql-escape-string} only when you must
dynamically construct @acronym{SQL} strings that cannot use
placeholders (e.g., dynamic table or column names).
@end defun

@defun mysql-version
Return a string denoting the version of the MySQL client library linked
with this module.

@lisp
(mysql-version)
    @result{} "8.0.36"
@end lisp
@end defun

@node MySQL Async API
@section Asynchronous (Non-blocking) Query Execution
@cindex asynchronous query, MySQL
@cindex non-blocking query, MySQL

  The asynchronous API allows executing MySQL queries without blocking
Emacs.  This requires MySQL 8.0.16+ @code{libmysqlclient}, which
provides @code{_nonblocking} functions internally.

  A typical async query involves three phases:

@enumerate
@item
@strong{Query phase}: Send the SQL to the server using
@code{mysql-query-start} and @code{mysql-query-continue}.
@item
@strong{Store phase}: Fetch the result set into client memory using
@code{mysql-store-result-start} and @code{mysql-store-result-continue}.
@item
@strong{Result phase}: Convert the stored result to Emacs Lisp using
@code{mysql-async-result} (no I/O, instant).
@end enumerate

  Each function in the query and store phases returns immediately.  The
caller is expected to poll using a timer or idle callback until the
status is no longer @code{not-ready}.

@lisp
;; Complete async query example:
(let ((status (mysql-query-start db "SELECT * FROM users")))
  ;; Phase 1: poll until query completes
  (while (eq status 'not-ready)
    (sit-for 0.02)
    (setq status (mysql-query-continue db)))
  ;; Phase 2: fetch result set
  (let ((pair (mysql-store-result-start db)))
    (while (eq (car pair) 'not-ready)
      (sit-for 0.02)
      (setq pair (mysql-store-result-continue db)))
    ;; Phase 3: convert to Elisp
    (mysql-async-result db (cdr pair) t)))
@end lisp

@defun mysql-query-start db sql
Begin an asynchronous query.  @var{sql} is the SQL string to execute.
Returns a symbol:
@itemize @bullet
@item @code{complete} --- the query finished instantly (fast path).
@item @code{not-ready} --- still in progress; call @code{mysql-query-continue}.
@item @code{error} --- the query failed (an Emacs error is also signaled).
@end itemize
@end defun

@defun mysql-query-continue db
Continue a previously started asynchronous query on @var{db}.  Returns
@code{complete}, @code{not-ready}, or @code{error}.  Call repeatedly
until the status changes from @code{not-ready}.
@end defun

@defun mysql-store-result-start db
Begin asynchronously fetching the result set into client memory.
Returns a cons cell @code{(@var{status} . @var{result-ptr})}, where
@var{status} is @code{complete}, @code{not-ready}, or @code{error},
and @var{result-ptr} is a user-pointer to the @code{MYSQL_RES}
(or @code{nil} for non-@code{SELECT} queries) when @var{status} is
@code{complete}.
@end defun

@defun mysql-store-result-continue db
Continue fetching the result set.  Returns the same cons cell format
as @code{mysql-store-result-start}.
@end defun

@defun mysql-async-result db result-ptr &optional full
Convert an already-stored @code{MYSQL_RES} (pointed to by
@var{result-ptr}) into an Emacs Lisp list.  This function performs
@strong{no I/O}---the data is already in client memory.

If @var{full} is non-@code{nil}, the column names are included as
the first element of the returned list (like @code{mysql-select} with
@code{full} return-type).

After this call, the result set is freed and @var{result-ptr} is
invalidated.

@lisp
(mysql-async-result db res-ptr t)
    @result{} (("id" "name") (1 "Alice") (2 "Bob"))
@end lisp
@end defun

@defun mysql-async-affected-rows db
After an asynchronous non-@code{SELECT} query completes, return the
number of affected rows.
@end defun

@defun mysql-async-field-count db
After an asynchronous query completes, return the field count.  Returns
0 for non-@code{SELECT} queries (@code{INSERT}, @code{UPDATE},
@code{DELETE}, @acronym{DDL}), and a positive number for @code{SELECT}
queries.  Use this to distinguish between the two cases:

@lisp
(if (> (mysql-async-field-count db) 0)
    ;; SELECT: use mysql-async-result
    (mysql-async-result db res-ptr t)
  ;; DML: use mysql-async-affected-rows
  (mysql-async-affected-rows db))
@end lisp
@end defun

@node MySQL Type Mapping
@section Type Mapping Between Emacs Lisp and MySQL
@cindex type mapping, MySQL
@cindex data types, MySQL

  The @code{mysql-el} module automatically converts values between Emacs
Lisp types and MySQL column types.  The exact mapping depends on
whether you are @emph{writing} values (bind parameters) or
@emph{reading} values (query results), and on whether the prepared-statement
path is used.

@subsection Writing: Emacs Lisp @expansion{} MySQL (Bind Parameters)

When using bind parameters (@samp{?} placeholders) with
@code{mysql-execute} or @code{mysql-select}, the following type mappings
are used:

@multitable @columnfractions .35 .35 .3
@headitem Emacs Lisp type @tab MySQL bind type @tab Notes
@item @code{string}
@tab @code{MYSQL_TYPE_STRING}
@tab Sent as UTF-8 encoded text.
@item @code{integer}
@tab @code{MYSQL_TYPE_LONGLONG}
@tab 64-bit signed integer.
@item @code{float}
@tab @code{MYSQL_TYPE_DOUBLE}
@tab 64-bit IEEE 754 double.
@item @code{nil}
@tab @code{MYSQL_TYPE_NULL}
@tab Binds as SQL @code{NULL}.
@end multitable

@noindent
MySQL performs implicit type coercion on the server side, so you can,
for example, bind an Emacs integer to a @code{DECIMAL} column and it
will be stored correctly.

@subsection Reading: MySQL @expansion{} Emacs Lisp (Non-Prepared Path)

When fetching results via the non-prepared path (i.e., @code{mysql-select}
or @code{mysql-execute} @emph{without} bind parameters), the module
inspects the MySQL column type metadata and converts each value to the
most appropriate Emacs Lisp type.

@subsubsection Integer Types @result{} Emacs @code{integer}

The following MySQL column types are returned as Emacs Lisp integers:

@multitable @columnfractions .25 .25 .5
@headitem MySQL type @tab SQL declaration @tab Range / Notes
@item @code{MYSQL_TYPE_TINY}
@tab @code{TINYINT}
@tab @minus{}128 to 127 (signed), 0 to 255 (unsigned).  @code{BOOLEAN}/@code{BOOL} is a synonym for @code{TINYINT(1)}.
@item @code{MYSQL_TYPE_SHORT}
@tab @code{SMALLINT}
@tab @minus{}32768 to 32767 (signed).
@item @code{MYSQL_TYPE_INT24}
@tab @code{MEDIUMINT}
@tab @minus{}8388608 to 8388607 (signed).
@item @code{MYSQL_TYPE_LONG}
@tab @code{INT}
@tab @minus{}2147483648 to 2147483647 (signed).
@item @code{MYSQL_TYPE_LONGLONG}
@tab @code{BIGINT}
@tab 64-bit signed integer.  Very large unsigned @code{BIGINT} values may overflow Emacs fixnum range; consider using strings for such columns.
@item @code{MYSQL_TYPE_YEAR}
@tab @code{YEAR}
@tab 4-digit year (e.g., 2026).
@end multitable

@lisp
(mysql-execute db "CREATE TABLE int_demo (
  a TINYINT, b SMALLINT, c MEDIUMINT,
  d INT, e BIGINT, f YEAR, g BOOLEAN)")
(mysql-execute db "INSERT INTO int_demo VALUES
  (-1, 300, 100000, 2000000, 9000000000, 2026, 1)")
(mysql-select db "SELECT * FROM int_demo")
    @result{} ((-1 300 100000 2000000 9000000000 2026 1))
@end lisp

@subsubsection Floating-Point and Decimal Types @result{} Emacs @code{float}

The following MySQL column types are returned as Emacs Lisp
floating-point numbers:

@multitable @columnfractions .30 .25 .45
@headitem MySQL type @tab SQL declaration @tab Notes
@item @code{MYSQL_TYPE_FLOAT}
@tab @code{FLOAT}
@tab Single-precision (32-bit) IEEE 754.
@item @code{MYSQL_TYPE_DOUBLE}
@tab @code{DOUBLE}
@tab Double-precision (64-bit) IEEE 754.
@item @code{MYSQL_TYPE_DECIMAL}
@tab @code{DECIMAL} (legacy)
@tab Converted via @code{strtod}; may lose precision for very high-precision values.
@item @code{MYSQL_TYPE_NEWDECIMAL}
@tab @code{DECIMAL}/@code{NUMERIC}
@tab The modern decimal type.  Also converted to Emacs float; precision beyond ~15 significant digits may be lost.
@end multitable

@lisp
(mysql-execute db "CREATE TABLE float_demo (
  a FLOAT, b DOUBLE, c DECIMAL(10,2), d DECIMAL(30,15))")
(mysql-execute db "INSERT INTO float_demo VALUES
  (3.14, 2.718281828, 12345.67, 123456789.123456789012345)")
(mysql-select db "SELECT * FROM float_demo")
    @result{} ((3.14 2.718281828 12345.67 1.2345678912345679e+08))
@end lisp

@noindent
@strong{Precision note:} If you need exact decimal arithmetic with more
than 15 significant digits, use the prepared-statement path (which
returns strings) and parse the values yourself.

@subsubsection String Types @result{} Emacs @code{string}

All other MySQL column types are returned as Emacs Lisp strings.  This
includes:

@multitable @columnfractions .35 .65
@headitem Category @tab MySQL types
@item Character strings
@tab @code{CHAR}, @code{VARCHAR}, @code{TINYTEXT}, @code{TEXT}, @code{MEDIUMTEXT}, @code{LONGTEXT}
@item Binary strings
@tab @code{BINARY}, @code{VARBINARY}, @code{TINYBLOB}, @code{BLOB}, @code{MEDIUMBLOB}, @code{LONGBLOB}
@item Date and time
@tab @code{DATE}, @code{TIME}, @code{DATETIME}, @code{TIMESTAMP}
@item Enumeration
@tab @code{ENUM}, @code{SET}
@item Structured
@tab @code{JSON}
@item Bit
@tab @code{BIT}
@item Spatial
@tab @code{GEOMETRY}, @code{POINT}, @code{LINESTRING}, @code{POLYGON}, etc.
@end multitable

@lisp
(mysql-execute db "CREATE TABLE str_demo (
  a VARCHAR(50), b DATE, c DATETIME(6),
  d JSON, e ENUM('x','y','z'))")
(mysql-execute db "INSERT INTO str_demo VALUES
  ('hello', '2026-03-26', '2026-03-26 12:30:00.123456',
   '@{"key":"val"@}', 'y')")
(mysql-select db "SELECT * FROM str_demo")
    @result{} (("hello" "2026-03-26" "2026-03-26 12:30:00.123456"
        "@{\"key\": \"val\"@}" "y"))
@end lisp

@subsubsection NULL @result{} Emacs @code{nil}

A @code{NULL} value in any column, regardless of the column type, is
always returned as Emacs Lisp @code{nil}.

@lisp
(mysql-select db "SELECT NULL, CAST(NULL AS SIGNED), CAST(NULL AS CHAR)")
    @result{} ((nil nil nil))
@end lisp

@subsection Reading: Prepared-Statement Path

@strong{Important:} When bind parameters are supplied (i.e., the
@var{values} argument to @code{mysql-select} or @code{mysql-execute} is
non-@code{nil}), all non-@code{NULL} result values are returned as
@strong{strings}, regardless of the MySQL column type.  This is because
the MySQL C prepared-statement @acronym{API} uses a uniform string
buffer for fetching results.

@lisp
;; Non-prepared: integers and floats are native types.
(mysql-select db "SELECT 42, 3.14")
    @result{} ((42 3.14))

;; Prepared: all values come back as strings.
(mysql-select db "SELECT id, salary FROM employees WHERE id = ?" '(1))
    @result{} (("1" "95000"))
@end lisp

@noindent
If you need native Emacs types from a prepared query, convert the
string results yourself:

@lisp
(let ((row (car (mysql-select db "SELECT id, salary FROM employees
                                  WHERE id = ?" '(1)))))
  (list (string-to-number (nth 0 row))    ; integer
        (string-to-number (nth 1 row))))   ; float
@end lisp

@subsection Complete Type Reference

The following table is an exhaustive reference of every MySQL column type
and its corresponding Emacs Lisp type, for both query paths.

@multitable @columnfractions .30 .30 .40
@headitem MySQL column type @tab Non-prepared path @tab Prepared path
@item @code{TINYINT} / @code{BOOLEAN}
@tab @code{integer}
@tab @code{string}
@item @code{SMALLINT}
@tab @code{integer}
@tab @code{string}
@item @code{MEDIUMINT}
@tab @code{integer}
@tab @code{string}
@item @code{INT}
@tab @code{integer}
@tab @code{string}
@item @code{BIGINT}
@tab @code{integer}
@tab @code{string}
@item @code{YEAR}
@tab @code{integer}
@tab @code{string}
@item @code{FLOAT}
@tab @code{float}
@tab @code{string}
@item @code{DOUBLE}
@tab @code{float}
@tab @code{string}
@item @code{DECIMAL} / @code{NUMERIC}
@tab @code{float}
@tab @code{string}
@item @code{CHAR} / @code{VARCHAR}
@tab @code{string}
@tab @code{string}
@item @code{TINYTEXT} / @code{TEXT} / @code{MEDIUMTEXT} / @code{LONGTEXT}
@tab @code{string}
@tab @code{string}
@item @code{BINARY} / @code{VARBINARY}
@tab @code{string}
@tab @code{string}
@item @code{TINYBLOB} / @code{BLOB} / @code{MEDIUMBLOB} / @code{LONGBLOB}
@tab @code{string}
@tab @code{string}
@item @code{DATE}
@tab @code{string}
@tab @code{string}
@item @code{TIME}
@tab @code{string}
@tab @code{string}
@item @code{DATETIME}
@tab @code{string}
@tab @code{string}
@item @code{TIMESTAMP}
@tab @code{string}
@tab @code{string}
@item @code{ENUM}
@tab @code{string}
@tab @code{string}
@item @code{SET}
@tab @code{string}
@tab @code{string}
@item @code{JSON}
@tab @code{string}
@tab @code{string}
@item @code{BIT}
@tab @code{string}
@tab @code{string}
@item @code{GEOMETRY} / spatial types
@tab @code{string}
@tab @code{string}
@item Any type with @code{NULL} value
@tab @code{nil}
@tab @code{nil}
@end multitable

@node MySQL Complete Example
@section A Complete Example
@cindex example, MySQL

  The following example demonstrates how to use the MySQL module to
manage a simple employee table.  It exercises all the core @acronym{API}
functions in sequence: connecting, creating a table, inserting data
(with and without bind parameters), querying, updating, using
transactions, batch execution, and closing the connection.

@lisp
;; Load the module.
(module-load "/path/to/mysql-el.so")

;; Connect to a MySQL server.
(setq db (mysql-open "127.0.0.1" "root" "" "mydb" 3306))

;; Create a table.
(mysql-execute db
  "CREATE TABLE employees (
     id     INT PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT,
     name   VARCHAR(100) NOT NULL,
     dept   VARCHAR(50),
     salary DOUBLE
   ) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8mb4")

;; Insert rows using plain SQL.
(mysql-execute db
  "INSERT INTO employees (name, dept, salary)
   VALUES ('Alice', 'Engineering', 95000)")
    @result{} 1

;; Insert a row using bind parameters (safer, prevents injection).
(mysql-execute db
  "INSERT INTO employees (name, dept, salary) VALUES (?, ?, ?)"
  '("Bob" "Product" 88000.0))
    @result{} 1

;; Query all employees.
(mysql-select db
  "SELECT name, dept, salary FROM employees ORDER BY id")
    @result{} (("Alice" "Engineering" 95000.0)
        ("Bob" "Product" 88000.0))

;; Query with column names (full mode).
(mysql-select db
  "SELECT name, salary FROM employees" nil 'full)
    @result{} (("name" "salary")
        ("Alice" 95000.0)
        ("Bob" 88000.0))

;; Conditional query with bind parameters.
(mysql-select db
  "SELECT name FROM employees WHERE dept = ?"
  '("Engineering"))
    @result{} (("Alice"))

;; Update rows; returns number of changed rows.
(mysql-execute db
  "UPDATE employees SET salary = salary * 1.1
   WHERE dept = 'Engineering'")
    @result{} 1

;; Use a transaction to insert multiple rows atomically.
(mysql-transaction db)
(mysql-execute db
  "INSERT INTO employees (name, dept, salary) VALUES (?, ?, ?)"
  '("Carol" "Engineering" 92000.0))
(mysql-execute db
  "INSERT INTO employees (name, dept, salary) VALUES (?, ?, ?)"
  '("Dave" "Finance" 78000.0))
(mysql-commit db)

;; Batch-execute multiple statements.
(mysql-execute-batch db
  "INSERT INTO employees (name, dept, salary)
     VALUES ('Eve', 'HR', 70000);
   INSERT INTO employees (name, dept, salary)
     VALUES ('Frank', 'HR', 72000);")
    @result{} t

;; Iterate over a large result set lazily with a set object.
(let ((set (mysql-select db
              "SELECT name, salary FROM employees ORDER BY id"
              nil 'set)))
  (unwind-protect
      (progn
        ;; Get column names.
        (mysql-columns set)
            @result{} ("name" "salary")
        ;; Fetch rows one by one.
        (while (mysql-more-p set)
          (let ((row (mysql-next set)))
            (when row
              (message "Employee: %s, salary: %s"
                       (nth 0 row) (nth 1 row))))))
    (mysql-finalize set)))

;; Clean up and close.
(mysql-execute db "DROP TABLE employees")
(mysql-close db)
@end lisp

@bye
